There we go.
We're taping Alice Hoffman.
Anyway, we're talking about Gwen.
She really does emerge as a character in this book, doesn't she?
She does, I think.
And I think, of course, Hank as well.
The younger characters really do become almost role models in reverse, wouldn't you think, in a way?
I think.
I think it's very true.
And I think sometimes that happens, you know, just as teenagers are kind of going through things.
some kind of, you know, the parents go through some crisis where the roles are reversed.
I think it's really interesting when that happens.
Was this something mindful that you think you pursued?
Well, you know, this book was in part, you know, kind of my paying homage to Wuthering Heights.
I never would have guessed.
And I think, you know, what's interesting in that book is that...
You know, is that people tend to forget that there's another generation and that the second half of the book is all about that second generation and kind of what their history and what the past has done to them and what the legacy, you know, your parents and relatives leave to you.
So that's really kind of what I was working from with Hank and Gwen.
You know, it's interesting that as the father of a 16-year-old daughter, and as I'm reading this, and my daughter Barbara says, Daddy, you haven't put that book down.
I said, Barbara, I think you'd like this.
And she loves to read, you know, and she reads faster than I do.
And I'm thinking, you know, of the many reasons that I think she'd like it is I like the way Gwen decides not to sleep with Hank.
You know what I'm saying?
Yeah.
Yeah, I do.
And I was kind of concerned.
I thought, oh, Jesus, we're going to have an incestuous relationship here.
And thankfully we don't.
Well, I think, you know, I think what happens with Gwen is that, you know, she starts out to be kind of this kid who just goes along with the crowd and she becomes more and more of an individual, more and more of an independent thinker.
I mean, it's really about her growing up.
And I think that's what growing up is about.
And the fact that she is not with a crowd, that she's like taken out of the crowd,
It's kind of left to her own devices.
And then she even disdains the crowd, even in the new place.
Right.
I mean, I have to say, I like her.
Yeah, she's great.
Do you ever think of bringing any of these characters back?
I don't know.
I mean, it's kind of a sad thing to say goodbye, but no, it seems like when they're done, they're done.
You know, they kind of go off to their own lives, and it doesn't have much to do with me.
I know when I read a book that I really like, I really do worry about the characters, you know?
And I was really kind of, and I'm not going to put this in my story, of course, but I said, geez, did Hank have to give up all the money?
I mean, couldn't he have kept any?
Yes, he did.
Did he really?
I think, yeah, I think it was really important that he kind of starts his own life unburdened by the legacy of the past, and I think that was part of it.
And I think, you know, also when you see
I think for some people when they see what, you know, what, it can be, it doesn't have to be money, it can be many different things, but the tie that binds you to some kind of, you know, terrible bargain, I think he had to, I think he had to cut that tie.
Excellent point.
So do you mind if we just pursue the Wuthering Heights angle just a tad?
You know, a concern there is that, of course, if you're too close to the model, then you certainly want to hold out some mystery, some surprises for the reader, right?
But you did that, I think.
Oh, well, thanks.
I think, you know, I wanted to, I mean, I could never tell that story, but, I mean, I'm so in awe of that book that I wanted to take some of those things and kind of see what would happen if they took place in my world.
Do you know what I mean?
So this was, okay, what if Kathy didn't die?
You know, what if he moved to California?
And, you know, I guess, you know, people have such strong feelings about that book and what it means, and
and such diverging feelings about Heathcliff and, you know, just the nature of love.
I mean, was it a perfect love?
Was it demonic love?
I mean, that book raises so many questions and doesn't give answers, and I think that's one of the things that makes the book continuing to be interesting is that it doesn't give you the answers.
It just raises these questions.
So I didn't want to, you know, feel anything or copy anything, but I just wanted to use some of those things that I think
she dealt with so amazingly.
You know, how many writers say, quite persuasively, that it is fiction that resonates, you know, and that teaches you about things.
And here you are, you're paying homage to a novel that continues to make us think about where we are today.
I think it's really true.
And, you know, I mean, I think that I always have the sense that, you know, there's a certain truth in fiction that's not in non-fiction because
because it comes from kind of an unconscious position that's not being guarded so that in a way I think, you know, it doesn't matter if Emily Bronte knew what she was saying.
It still has these amazing lessons to teach us.
You know, you said in our, and I'm looking here, at our 1995 interview, and let's see, my daughter's also found the earlier interview.
Isn't that great, kids doing your filing for you?
But you are really a product of your reading.
You personally, you know, that you're... I think that's really an appropriate statement in view of this particular book.
Well, you know, I think, you know, for me it was true of Weathering Heights.
There are other books that are true of it.
I think it is for most people who are readers, you know, whether they become writers or not.
I think, you know, one example of that is, you know, Catcher in the Rye, which is such a formula, you know, because...
impacted so many people on a very personal level.
I think there are books that kind of speak to you, depending on what time of your life you read them.
And, you know, not that I think those are the only lessons to learn, but, you know, I certainly feel like people who read, I think...
I think they're kind of more open to different points of view.
You know, another thing, if you don't mind my revisiting some of these areas, that's one of the good things I like about doing multiple interviews with authors over the years, by the way.
Because, of course, you remember what we said and you have no idea.
Well, that's fine, but I'll read a little bit to you.
You know, it seems very appropriate.
I remember asking you, you know, do you find that, well, I don't want to read the whole interview to you, but in terms of becoming apparent and how it changed your fiction writing.
But what I see now, here's a particularly telling quote.
We were talking about discipline and how you had to work faster.
You didn't have the luxury of time.
Right.
Even now I'm thinking, oh, my kids are going to come into this room.
That's right.
But then I said, but that's discipline.
How about in terms of content?
You said, but it will completely change it.
I feel like I crossed over some line and went to the other side.
I went from the child's point of view to the parent's point of view.
I feel like I totally crossed over.
And then I said, children still remain very much in the center of what you're doing.
And you say, oh, yes, very much.
I do still write about children a lot, but my allegiance changed.
But I find, you know, that as your own children get older.
I'm going backwards.
I feel, you know, I do feel very close to that teenage girl.
And I have a lot of, you know, I have a lot of readers who are mothers and daughters.
It really makes me feel good, you know, that they hear my books.
That's great.
It's a really great feeling because I think it's really a way to communicate and a lot of times it's a point when you can't communicate.
I have to tell you, do you mindfully develop that Gwen is going to become the wise young woman?
I don't think I mindfully develop anything to tell you the truth.
I think I have characters and I think I have an underlying theme, but other than that,
I don't really know what's going to happen or what's going to happen to these characters until I'm done.
You know, I haven't asked you the, we'll put it in quotes, the magic question that you must always be getting.
But it is interesting that this wonderful horse is named Tarrot.
Is that just a name that you like?
Does he foretell anything?
It's interesting because I feel like, you know, I don't think it out, but then when I look at it later, I feel like, oh, yeah, he's the future.
He tells the future.
Yeah.
He tells the past.
Both.
I don't think about it when I'm doing it.
You know, it's an unconscious thing.
When I look at it, I think, oh, this is it.
Makes perfect sense, doesn't it?
And there are several points of view that you develop in this book which I think are interesting too.
You're not writing from the point of view of this one woman or March or Hollis or this and that.
You are developing multiple points of view here in this novel.
Well, I think I'm interested in that.
I'm interested in, and especially in this book, it's kind of about a town.
And so you get the feeling of many voices and the feeling of kind of like a lot of life going on in the town.
But I think it's also, I mean, I always find it interesting, you know, as a reader to think about, you know, the way that Wuthering Heights was told.
It's told, you know, removed.
It's told by somebody, to somebody, about somebody else.
It's a story, you know?
And I feel like
You know, maybe it breaks it up a little and makes you feel like, oh, this is a story being told.
But I think it gives you kind of a more interesting point of view.
I have to say one thing.
I always like to predict certain things when I'm reading it.
Good writers like yourself, nothing is wasted and nothing is there that doesn't have a function, you know.
Route 22, Route 22.
And I said, Route 22 is going to play a very important role
in this novel, one way or another.
I thought maybe the two of them, you know, but no, it was correct the way you did it.
But did you, when you were creating this town, I mean, I'm trying to place it because I love maps, you know, and so I mean, it's certainly a North Shore community someplace not far from Rye 93.
But did you have a... I didn't.
I didn't.
I mean, I knew I wanted it to, I knew what I wanted it to look like and feel like.
I didn't,
It's not based on a real town.
I knew I wanted it to be north of Boston.
And the funny thing is, you know, after I wrote the book, I started to get panicked.
And I thought, oh, my God, what if there is a Route 22?
And I called up, is it AA or AAA?
I forget what it's called.
AAA, yeah.
Yeah.
And I said, you know, I'm just trying to find out if there's a Route 22 in Massachusetts.
And they did their computer thing, and they came back and said, yeah, there is a Route 22.
It's north of Boston.
And I forget exactly where it is, but it is in the place where I thought of this town.
And I thought, well, do I go out and drive this?
And then I thought, no.
It just is what it is.
Yeah, that's interesting.
I have a Route 122, which goes right by here.
It's Central Mass.
It goes through, I'm in Grafton, so it goes through Grafton, Shrewsbury, and it goes down towards Providence.
Well, I guess there's a Route 22 somewhere like around Gloucester.
Yeah, I'm sure there is.
I mean...
Let's say that's your business.
You're right.
And I'm glad you used, you know, I mean, it's a fictional town, but I'm glad you used otherwise real places and things, you know.
I mean, it gives you as a writer, like, tremendous freedom to, you know, put anything anywhere you want.
Yeah, but that is interesting that you do consider the town as much of a character, so to speak, as the characters themselves.
I do, in this book especially, yeah.
Chris, I don't want to ask you too many questions about the book, you know, but, you know, Children at Risk has always, not always, but it has been a continuing theme of yours.
Are there themes that you're continuing to develop?
No, I think that there probably are, but I think they're unconscious.
I'm not really aware of them, and I think it's probably true that most writers have, you know, a story to tell, and that their story is different variations on, you know...
you know, their major interest, and I'm not exactly sure what that is, and I'm not exactly sure it's good for a writer to think about that or know that, you know?
So I don't know.
I don't think about that much.
Do you still write almost compulsively?
Well, I pretty much write every day.
I mean, you know, especially when I'm working on a specific project or toward the end of a project.
So, you know, I write a lot, and I've written some kids' books lately also.
Really?
A real fun thing to do, yeah.
Yeah, I love it.
In fact, are these under contract, or is this something?
Yeah, one is coming out this fall.
It's being published by Hyperion.
Okay, let me really make, I'm now writing a monthly children's book review.
Yeah, I started it six months ago, and I'm telling you, this is as popular.
I've really found a niche.
I'm really treating children's books.
I'm really, really devoted to them, you know.
Wow.
I'm writing a few children's books myself, but that's, you know, neither here nor there.
Well, there's kind of a purity, it seems to me, in that section of business that's totally driven by what kids want to read, which is really nice.
And I've found that I'm able to place this in newspapers.
Orlando is taking me, for instance, I'm their children's book reviewer.
And Denver is about to take it.
I've got maybe eight papers taking this monthly book review of eight books.
Actually, my wife, I say we, but it is definitely a we.
Is she involved?
I couldn't do it.
Are you kidding?
I basically sit down at the computer after she's made the selection and written up the
you know, the reviews, and then I write them, and we actually have like an editorial conference where we discuss what we want to do, and we get art, so we distribute art to the papers, and we get terrific pickup, you know, so please make sure, and I have good connections with, I mean, good relationship with Hyperion, so please make sure, you know, you'll be very pleased with the
And I give it about 150 or 200 word review.
I mean, I really treat it on its merits, you know, and take it on its own terms.
I had a huge, for this new book of writing, I finally, it took me a year and a half, but I had an interview with Maurice Sendak.
Oh, that must have been, that's right.
Yeah, it was magnificent.
In his house, you know, among his things.
Did he have German Shepherds?
No, he didn't have any dogs when we were there.
I think he died.
But we're going back, and I'm going back in another two or three weeks to finish up.
Civilization magazine is taking a piece from me on him.
That's fantastic.
I'm glad you're really busy.
I am.
Well, hey, I've got to make a living.
You don't slow down.
But Sendak, I have to tell you, this is so great.
He won't let me use this, but he is such a product of his reading, like yourself.
Yeah.
You know, he never went to college, Sendak.
You know, everything he is, everything his work is, is energized by what he's read.
Now he's totally obsessed with Shakespeare and Keats, and he also buys things.
To understand Melville, he went and he snuck, and he actually was lying down in Melville's bed, you know.
And he sat in his chair, and then he said, I can't use this.
I'm going to try and talk him into it.
When the interview was done, he said, come on with me.
And I go into his study, and he has a death mask of John Keats, which was molded within 24 hours of his death.
And every time he goes to write, he touches this face.
And you talk about being inspired by, you know, he literally has contact, physical tactile contact with Keats.
It really blew me away, I have to say.
But, you know, you talk about taking your reading to the extreme.
You're not kidding.
I can understand that.
I mean, I don't think I could do that, but I can really understand wanting to do that.
Yeah.
Anyway, we're talking about reading.
Can you give me just a... I have to tell you, I'm going out to San Francisco in two or three weeks.
I'm having a chapter in this new book I'm doing.
on reading you know the nicholson baker thing in new york and the new yorker about the destruction they they're very oh yes yes yeah uh well i'm interviewing everyone out there tilly olson you know who's a this whole band of what they call library activists out there there's one gray panther a woman who has 1300 books that were discarded by the san francisco public library and she's keeping them in her house
Until they come back to their senses kind of a thing.
I actually just wrote a little something about this.
I think it's so horrible that they're destroying books and putting them on microfilm.
I mean, San Francisco, that's the biggest scandal, but they do it everywhere a little bit.
Well, I've been everywhere, and then that's just the tip of the iceberg.
Yeah, I know, I know.
I have one institution, Ivy League institution, thankfully not here,
that by the year 2000 will have its collection of 6.8 million books down to 5 million.
That is so disgusting.
And then don't they say in the year 2000 something's going to happen with computers so that everything is going to be wiped out on computers?
Oh, the bug, yeah, what do they call it?
Yeah, the zero-zero is going to screw everything up, but that's billing.
That's for those books.
That would not affect the books.
It wouldn't.
That's billing, you know, like when you get your computer bill, the computer is going to see zero-zero, and instead of thinking 2,000, it's going to think 1,900.
I don't trust any of it.
But I don't trust any of it either.
I don't take a book any day.
But that is a, you know, you'll take a book any day, right?
Yeah.
Did you do much in libraries when you were a kid?
Yeah, I spent a lot of time in libraries.
I mean, you know, not educated time, but time.
And, you know, my public library was really important to me.
Because I could get there as a kid.
You know, I could walk there and I could get where I wanted.
Huge amounts of freedom.
Where was this?
It was on Long Island.
Okay.
You grew up on Long Island.
Yeah.
You know, I'm a big library fan.
Very big.
And continue to be, of course.
Yeah.
Well, Tilly Olson pointed out, you know, how many people learned everything they knew from libraries.
And this is something I'm developing.
You know, Shaw, for instance, everything he learned was from the British Library.
And she said, well, Malcolm X, you know, everything was from the prison library.
And I remember when I lived in California, I had relatives telling me, everyone used to tell them about the library so much.
It was such a huge library.
Well, you know who underwrote her?
This new one is Pacific Bell.
which is maybe one of the reasons why they're going into all this wired stuff.
Anyway, it's a fascinating story that goes beyond.
I've got interviews lined up with about 15 people when I go out there next month.
But it's one of those cases where Nick Baker, really, his stories were just part of the story.
and uh you know normally when something is written that that thoroughly i leave it alone but but i think in this case it's just the beginning because it really does more or less tell you everything about it's it's it's a it's a microcosmic example of what's going on everywhere i mean i'm very interested in this also anyway you know it's i don't want to take up too much of your time yeah well it's good to
I just talked to you.
You're just doing great.
I'm having fun.
And how about our next book?
Are you well on to the next one?
Yeah, I'm working on the next book, and I also have, you know, I have actually two kids' books coming out from Hyperion, and then I'm working on another book now, but it's not at the point where I feel like I can talk about it.
Okay, well, can you tell me the title of the book that's coming out from Hyperion?
Yeah, it's called Fireflies.
One word.
Uh-huh, one word.
And what's the age group?
The age group is, you know, it's kind of in all ages.
I think they have a three to five.
It's a folktale.
And I think they did a beautiful job of it.
I think it's really pretty.
It's about a boy who's really clumsy.
And his clumsiness kind of saves the day.
And it's illustrated?
Yeah, it's got beautiful illustrations.
I think they're gorgeous.
Who's the artist?
The guy's name is Wayne McLaughlin, and this is his first kind of picture book.
He's done other books for them, science books.
but it's extremely beautiful.
Very unique look to what I think.
So what possessed you to do a children's book?
Well, I wanted to do it before my kids got too old for me to read it to them.
And how old are your kids now?
Well, my youngest kid is nine.
So it was either now or never.
Is this a story that maybe you've worked on together?
No, but he was the first person to hear it, and he kind of
tell me what he thought about that.
And it was, you know, it was a really, it was a nice experience kind of doing it together.
And, you know, seeing the different, you know, seeing it first as a manuscript and then seeing the artist
drawings coming in, and then seeing the whole process I think was really interesting for him.
I think I do have one other question, if I can pose it in a way that makes sense.
But do you think these recent books, certainly since you've had children, more or less reflect the continuing process of being a parent?
Yeah, I think so.
I mean, I feel like I can see it more from all sides now.
I think, you know, first I saw it just from, you know, being a child, a child's point of view, you know, through my 30s or whatever, you know what I mean?
Right, right.
And then I think I saw it just from a parent's point of view, you know, when you have young children and you're so, that is so much your main interest is like being a caregiver and so much of it is physical work and, you know, and at this point I feel like, well, hopefully I can see it from all sides.
That's the sense that I have here, too.
And I don't find that... I know when my kids were 16 and 14, you know, you go through that phase where you're afraid to let them...
go down for ice cream you know i mean you just have to let them go and then you really do have to let them go out you know and do what do whatever i mean i feel like my best response to a book would be like if you and your daughter both loved it yeah well i i she grabbed it and uh yeah well she and she's a very very she's a wonderful reader her insights are outstanding you know um
I use these.
I use my daughters and my wife, who loves biography and nonfiction.
In fact, she'll read books that I want to read but don't have time to, and she'll basically tell me everything I want to know out of it.
Oh, great.
You know, like the biography of William Blake, which she's now into this Virginia Woolf biography by Hermione Lee, which is a family business.
Yeah, well, Virginia Woolf was totally a product of her reading.
Her reading.
I mean, was never really formally educated.
Everything was her father's library.
And you read her notebooks, I mean, she gets very angry when real life intrudes on her reading, you know?
That's so interesting.
Well, I also feel like there are periods in your life that reading, that books make a big impression.
I think one of those times when you're like, you know, kind of 15, 16.
I think that really, it's a time when you're really open.
And I think if you don't really develop it at that point, it's going to be awfully hard any other time.
Yeah, well, anyway, it's nice to talk to you.
Nice talking to you, and thanks for calling precisely at 9 o'clock.
I was all ready for you.
I have my coffee and my tape recorder, and there's no need to talk really anymore about the novel.
I thought it was wonderful.
Personally, I think it was, and I've read easily half a dozen of your books.
I think it's the best one that I've read.
I enjoyed it enormously.
I appreciate it.
I kind of think so, too.
And the writing is really terrific.
Thank you.
You set that opening scene out there in the marshes, and I'm trying to figure what you're up to here.
And I said, she's got the mood.
It's right there.
It's terrific.
I'm hooked.
So I wasn't much fun at the beach this weekend, but hey.
Well, I'm glad for my sake.
We'll talk to you.
I'll talk to you soon.
Okay, and please remind Hyperion to send me the kids' book.
I definitely will.
I hope you like it.
I'm sure I will.
Bye-bye.
Take care.